[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the IVM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine you're a farmer with an empty bank balance and little cash.
[Amit Varma]: You're about to sow your crops at the start of the season and are filled with uncertainty.
[Amit Varma]: What if the monsoon is bad?
[Amit Varma]: What if the harvest isn't good for some other reason this year?
[Amit Varma]: If you're unable to sell your produce at the end of the season, you will be deeply in debt
[Amit Varma]: and will not be able to put food on the table.
[Amit Varma]: Just as you're getting stressed out over this thought, a man in a floral t-shirt and Bermuda
[Amit Varma]: shorts appears in front of you.
[Amit Varma]: He gives you a sunny smile, a plate of fried eggs sunny side up, and then grabs you by
[Amit Varma]: the hand and takes you to a Las Vegas-style casino.
[Amit Varma]: There, he takes you to a roulette table and he says, spin.
[Amit Varma]: And even as your first instinct is to get away from him, a voice in your head says,
[Amit Varma]: don't worry.
[Amit Varma]: This is exactly what you need.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, my weekly podcast in which I talk about the seen and
[Amit Varma]: unseen effects of public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Today's subject is futures markets in agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: The government in India has always been wary of futures markets in agriculture, either
[Amit Varma]: regulating them heavily or simply banning them outright.
[Amit Varma]: What is the seen effect of this?
[Amit Varma]: The seen effect of restricting futures markets in agriculture is that farmers don't become
[Amit Varma]: gamblers.
[Amit Varma]: After all, their place is on a farm, not in a casino.
[Amit Varma]: Ah well, you could argue that the whole world is a casino and that the farmers are already
[Amit Varma]: gambling.
[Amit Varma]: To speak more about the subject and to take us through the unseen effects of such regulation,
[Amit Varma]: I have with me Karthik Shashidhar, a renowned quant with a cult following, a management
[Amit Varma]: consultant, a columnist at Mint who also corrupts young minds by teaching at IIM Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: Karthik, what are futures in agriculture?
[Guest]: Okay, first let me talk about what are futures, right?
[Guest]: And then we'll come to the agriculture.
[Guest]: So usually, so let's say for example, that like, I'm okay, actually I'll take the agriculture
[Guest]: example.
[Guest]: I want to sell something, let's say six months down the line, and I don't know what the price
[Guest]: will be then, right?
[Guest]: So futures is basically a contract I strike with you saying, let's say on the 26th of
[Guest]: May 2017, I'm going to sell you a hundred kilos of rice for which you're going to pay
[Guest]: me 10,000 rupees.
[Guest]: So it's a contract you strike on one day for execution on a future date.
[Guest]: So the future, at the simplest level, that's a futures contract, which is basic.
[Guest]: And then, and futures are typically traded on an exchange.
[Guest]: So in commodities, you have like the multi commodities exchange and NCDEX and so on.
[Guest]: For stock market, you have BSE and NSE and things like that, where futures are traded.
[Amit Varma]: So why do governments tend to be distrustful of future markets and why, for example, has
[Amit Varma]: there over the years been so much regulation in futures trading and agriculture?
[Guest]: Yeah, just to give a little history into this, futures trading and agriculture had been blanket
[Guest]: banned in 1952 or something like that.
[Guest]: There was some Forward Contracts Regulation Act, which banned it.
[Amit Varma]: What was the logic for it?
[Guest]: Logic for it is that like, it's an anti-farmer, futures are anti-farmer.
[Guest]: It like supports evil speculators who can buy cheap from the farmer and sell at an expensive
[Guest]: rate to the consumer.
[Guest]: And if you were to take out the evil speculator, and instead like kind of force the farmer
[Guest]: to sell through regulated markets, then both the farmers and the consumers can gain.
[Guest]: So that was the logic back then.
[Guest]: 2003, they figured out the fault in the logic and they undid that regulation.
[Guest]: And futures markets in all...
[Amit Varma]: So what did they understand?
[Guest]: What is the flaw in that logic?
[Guest]: The flaw in the logic that like futures are anti-farmer, it's very hard to simply describe
[Guest]: what the flaw in the logic is.
[Guest]: But the basic logic is that futures are pro-farmer because they allow, they're a key risk management
[Guest]: tool for a farmer, because for a farmer, one of the biggest sources of risk, apart from
[Guest]: monsoon failing and electricity and things like that, a big source of risk is price risk.
[Guest]: If I am going to grow coffee today, if I need to make a decision that I want to grow coffee,
[Guest]: I need to know how much that coffee will fetch me when I'm going to harvest it now.
[Guest]: And futures markets is one excellent way for me to know what it's going to fetch me.
[Guest]: And if the government decides to ban that, I have absolutely no information on price
[Guest]: and I have to speculate.
[Guest]: So the lack of futures markets actually results in farmers speculating.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And instead of the certainty it provides.
[Amit Varma]: So the scene effect of regulating or banning futures market would appear to be that there's
[Amit Varma]: no speculation and it's, you know, you don't introduce the logic of the casino into something
[Amit Varma]: as initial as agriculture, but the unseen effect is the opposite happens, you're saying.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So let me just take a recent example.
[Guest]: I think in August this year, the government recommended SEBI to ban futures trading in
[Guest]: sugar.
[Guest]: The trigger for that was that prices of sugar had been increasing and the government in
[Guest]: its wisdom said, the festival season is approaching.
[Guest]: You don't want consumers to suffer because sugar prices are going to go up.
[Guest]: So and it's because of evil speculators that like prices are going up.
[Guest]: So let's ban speculation, let's ban all futures contracts.
[Guest]: But then like, think about it, right?
[Guest]: I mean, what a futures price essentially recommends or represents is actual demand supply imbalance
[Guest]: in the future.
[Guest]: Why would you speculate?
[Guest]: Let's say you're a hoarder, right?
[Guest]: You think of all those hoarders who are villains of all the 1970s Hindi movies.
[Guest]: If you're a hoarder, I would hoard something if and only if I know it's going to fetch
[Guest]: me a higher price in the future.
[Guest]: And how do I know it's going to fetch me a higher price in the future?
[Guest]: For whatever reason I have in info on the market, I'm probably, I have my eyes and ears
[Guest]: close to the market.
[Guest]: And I know that there's a shortage of this coming up sometime soon.
[Guest]: And because of that, I'm going to hoard.
[Guest]: And yes, so it is a logical thing to say that futures markets possibly encourages hoarding.
[Guest]: But then hoarding also encourages efficient distribution of resources.
[Guest]: And information.
[Guest]: And this is the other thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, this is something I want to talk about.
[Guest]: So basically, if you're a farmer, think about a socialist utopia.
[Guest]: In a socialist utopia, the government or whoever it is decides that, okay, this year we need
[Guest]: to plant 100 kilos of rice, 200 kilos of wheat, whatever.
[Guest]: And these are the farmers who need to plant that and so on, right?
[Guest]: And in the presence of perfect information, possibly it might work, but then that leads
[Guest]: to a coercive state.
[Guest]: So how do you come up to the same conclusion in terms of how do you, how do you get millions
[Guest]: of farmers across the country to coordinate on who grows what every year?
[Guest]: For that, you need a way to capture information.
[Guest]: So if I am a farmer, if I need to be steered towards growing what others are not growing,
[Guest]: the futures market is a great place for me to know what others are growing.
[Guest]: So let's say for example, lots of people are growing rice and have sold rice in the futures
[Guest]: market because they know they're going to grow rice.
[Guest]: Then I'll see that the price of rice in the futures market is down.
[Guest]: So it makes less sense for me to buy rice and maybe I'll grow wheat instead and so on,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So when a large number of farmers take a look at this futures market and participate in
[Guest]: it because as soon as they make the decision on what to grow, they need to lock in the
[Guest]: price on the futures market, they are exchanging information with each other and they together
[Guest]: will collectively come up to a decision on what is good for the country.
[Amit Varma]: So is it correct to say that just as prices convey information, futures market are one
[Amit Varma]: great mechanism for actually propagating that information efficiently?
[Guest]: So I would put it a little differently.
[Guest]: You say prices convey information.
[Guest]: Futures markets are again like futures prices, they convey information of what the market
[Guest]: looks like in the future.
[Guest]: So it helps people make more efficient decisions because they have more information on what
[Guest]: things are going to be like in the future, right?
[Guest]: So instead of going to the village astrologer to know what the price of rice is going to
[Guest]: be, you go to the futures market to know what the price is and make your decision accordingly.
[Amit Varma]: Where the wisdom of crowds come into play basically.
[Guest]: Where the wisdom of crowds come into play and the important thing is this, it's the
[Guest]: participation.
[Guest]: So it's important for futures markets to work.
[Guest]: It's important that a lot of people are participating in the market.
[Guest]: If I only use the futures market to as a price reference and don't actually trade on it,
[Guest]: what will happen is like whatever my information on what I'm going to grow is not going to
[Guest]: get disseminated to the larger group of farmers.
[Guest]: So basically to use a phrase from another context, you don't want lurkers in the futures
[Unknown]: market.
[Guest]: So if I'm participating in the futures market, it's good for me because it locks in my price
[Guest]: and it's good for everybody else because they know what I'm growing.
[Guest]: They get that information.
[Guest]: And it happens in a completely anonymous fashion.
[Guest]: You don't need to know which is the farmer who's growing rice so that you can go beat
[Guest]: him up so that he doesn't grow rice because it happens at a large decentralized level.
[Amit Varma]: Moving aside agriculture for the moment, can you give me examples of futures markets in
[Guest]: India which work?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So for example, India has one of the most vibrant futures markets when it comes to stocks.
[Guest]: So if you take, let's say for example, you want to bet that, so Nifty is trading at around
[Guest]: 8,000 now.
[Guest]: You want to bet that it's going to go to 8,500 in six months down the line.
[Guest]: So if there's a six month futures, sell on the futures market and then like you can lock
[Guest]: in the price.
[Amit Varma]: So that locks in your preference and it sends information of your perception to everyone
[Guest]: else and that affects, exactly.
[Guest]: So it's a way to collect the wisdom of crowds, as you mentioned a while back.
[Guest]: So it's profitable both for you and for everybody else.
[Guest]: So it's a kind of a Pareto optimal thing to have futures markets.
[Amit Varma]: So now you mentioned before I rudely interrupted you that the ban on futures markets in India
[Amit Varma]: was lifted in 2003, I think that it was, but regulation has continued on an ad hoc basis
[Guest]: since.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So the biggest problem with the futures markets now is one problem is that you have large
[Guest]: lot sizes.
[Guest]: This is there in the financial futures also.
[Guest]: The logic is that like the small retail investor needs to be protected or small farmer needs
[Guest]: to be protected.
[Guest]: So you don't want small farmers to be gambling their money away in the futures markets.
[Guest]: So you need to have like, like to buy futures in stocks, you need to have at least two lakh
[Guest]: rupees for commodity.
[Guest]: It's, it's a larger number.
[Guest]: So, so because of that, all farmers cannot participate in the futures market.
[Guest]: So they are one denied the information to their denied the opportunity to convey their
[Guest]: information.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And the second thing, and which is more kind of problematic in terms of the use of futures
[Guest]: markets is this whole ad hoc banning.
[Guest]: So earlier this year, for example, the prices of sugar were going up and the government
[Guest]: decided that, okay, so the way they did it was this one prices of sugar are going up
[Guest]: to futures markets exists in sugar.
[Guest]: And then they come up with a causation that because futures markets exist in sugar, the
[Guest]: prices are going up, ban the futures markets.
[Guest]: Brilliant.
[Guest]: So the, the good thing now, and this is an important piece of reform from this year's
[Guest]: union budget, which people have missed is that earlier you used to have this entity
[Guest]: called a forward markets commission who used to recommend, who used to regulate all futures
[Guest]: and options markets in both agriculture and single stocks and so on.
[Guest]: After a scam, I mean, a lot of reform in India, I think happens on the back of scams.
[Guest]: After a scam last year on the national spot exchange, what the government decided was
[Guest]: to merge the FMC with SEBI, who's the securities market regulator and who has a great reputation
[Guest]: of fair securities market regulation over the last 25 years.
[Guest]: So now earlier, FMC was a very pliable kind of a regulator.
[Guest]: Government would say, ban futures in this, they would go and ban it.
[Guest]: This year, two times government asked SEBI, why don't you ban futures trading in sugar?
[Guest]: And SEBI said, no way, it's a, we know markets better and banning futures trading is not
[Guest]: going to kind of really result in kind of curbing the price.
[Amit Varma]: So we are not going to ban it.
[Amit Varma]: So given the role of futures market in a bringing some certainty to say a farmer in this case
[Amit Varma]: and also in disseminating information, is there any circumstance in which it is correct
[Amit Varma]: to ban futures markets?
[Guest]: I can't think of any.
[Guest]: You can't think of any?
[Amit Varma]: And is it therefore any reason to regulate them at all?
[Guest]: You need to regulate them in terms of like, let's say, for example, like you were to regulate
[Guest]: stock markets, because you need to make sure that like, for example, there's counterparty
[Guest]: risk.
[Guest]: Let's say I pledge to sell you 10,000 kilos of rice, and then like you go bankrupt.
[Guest]: My kind of contact needs to be upheld, right, which is why you need to have futures trading
[Guest]: on an exchange where counterparty risk is protected and so on.
[Guest]: Second thing is you don't want fraud in the futures market.
[Guest]: I mean, see, the thing is, protecting the small farmer is actually a good kind of intention.
[Guest]: And you need to protect him against fraud and so on.
[Guest]: So how do you kind of prevent that?
[Guest]: A little bit of a gray area here is in terms of like, marketing and sales of futures, because
[Guest]: sometimes like, I mean, there's no, I can't think of a good way to regulate them, because
[Guest]: you don't want, there can be massive mis-selling if you were to actually allow it.
[Guest]: I mean, that's possibly the reason why governments don't allow small farmers to actually trade
[Guest]: in futures markets and so on.
[Guest]: Because they can be like massive, like if I'm an investment banker looking to make a
[Guest]: good buck, I can go catch some poor guy and like sell him some like, there's a recent
[Guest]: case of Goldman Sachs selling a large number of some call options on Citigroup to Libya
[Guest]: in 2008.
[Guest]: Libya thought they were buying Citigroup stock, Goldman had sold them options.
[Guest]: And the Libyan Investment Authority lost more than a billion dollars or something.
[Guest]: And recently they sued Goldman and the case got thrown out by a court in England.
[Amit Varma]: So in regulatory terms, now that SEBI, which as you say, has a very good record of regulation
[Amit Varma]: over the past 20-25 years, is in charge of regulating future markets, is this an ideal
[Amit Varma]: situation or in policy terms, is there something else that you would suggest?
[Guest]: I think it's a good situation that SEBI is regulating now, because like, there's no reason
[Guest]: why commodities futures are different from stock futures and why stock futures are different
[Guest]: from stocks and so on.
[Guest]: So it's good that everything is under one umbrella.
[Guest]: And it's under a good umbrella because I think SEBI has had a fantastic record in the way
[Guest]: it has regulated stock markets in the past.
[Guest]: In the, one of the things is, I mean, you do have restrictions in the market.
[Guest]: Like for example, you can only use futures for hedging and not for speculation.
[Guest]: There's actually, so you, like any other law, this law has been written in a way that it's
[Guest]: very hard to kind of be enforced.
[Guest]: It's very hard to kind of follow without breaching.
[Guest]: So the ambiguity needs to be removed.
[Guest]: There's an ambiguity in terms of like, am I a farmer?
[Guest]: Am I using it for hedging and so on, right?
[Guest]: So that bit kind of needs to be kind of removed so that the regulation is far simpler.
[Guest]: While on the other hand, you need to have some ways of consumer protection because you
[Guest]: don't want too much of like mis-selling and stuff to go on, which can potentially happen.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So to sum it up, why don't you tell me again, what are the unseen effects of either banning
[Guest]: or over-regulation of futures markets?
[Guest]: Okay, the main unseen effect is that it results in speculation.
[Guest]: The seen effect of futures banning is that it cuts speculation.
[Guest]: The unseen effect is that it results in speculation because people are denied information.
[Guest]: And when you have information, there's no need to speculate.
[Guest]: It's only when you don't have information that you try and speculate.
[Guest]: And that's what people do in the futures market.
[Amit Varma]: So by not allowing farmers in the futures market, we're turning them into gamblers.
[Guest]: We are turning them into gamblers.
[Amit Varma]: Karthik, pleasure having you on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: If William Shakespeare had been used to thinking probabilistically, he would have no doubt
[Amit Varma]: said that all the world's a casino, all the men and women merely gamblers.
[Amit Varma]: Every action we take is in some way a gamble of some sort, based on our estimate of probabilities
[Amit Varma]: and our weighing up costs and benefits.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe we don't think about it in these terms, but intuitively that's what we're doing.
[Amit Varma]: Consider the irony then that futures markets, which seem to us to be an arena for gambling,
[Amit Varma]: actually reduce the risk in a farmer's life.
[Unknown]: Who would have thunk?
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and The Unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Varun Mitra about
[Unknown]: the anti-defection law.
[Amit Varma]: For more, go to seenunseen.in If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The
[Amit Varma]: Unseen, check out another show by IVM Podcasts, Symbolified, which is hosted by my good friends
[Amit Varma]: Naren, Chuck, and Srikith.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it at Audioboom or iTunes.
[Unknown]: Hey man, just help me out, man, I need some, I need some podcasts, man, I haven't had a
[Unknown]: fix in a week, just need some.
[Unknown]: Don't you worry about it, I got podcasts galore for you, man.
[Unknown]: Just go to ivmpodcasts.com, you can also find us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Thanks, man, I'm gonna check it out.